



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 S. Huque
Internet-Draft                                                Salesforce
Intended status: Standards Track                              C. Elmerot
Expires: 4 September 2023                                     Cloudflare
                                                            3 March 2023


                 Compact Denial of Existence in DNSSEC
                   draft-huque-dnsop-compact-lies-01

Abstract

   This document describes a technique to generate a signed DNS response
   on demand for a non-existent name by claiming that the name exists
   but doesn't have any data for the queried record type.  Such answers
   require only one minimal NSEC record, allow online signing servers to
   minimize signing operations and response sizes, and prevent zone
   content disclosure.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 4 September 2023.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2023 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.











Huque & Elmerot         Expires 4 September 2023                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Compact Denial of Existence in DNSSEC       March 2023


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Distinguishing NXDOMAIN from Empty Non-Terminal Names . . . .   3
   3.  Generating Responses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Responses for Non-Existent Names  . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Responses for Non-Existent Types  . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.3.  Responses for Wildcard Matches  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Operational Implications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Implementation Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction and Motivation

   RFC EDITOR: PLEASE REMOVE THIS PARAGRAPH BEFORE PUBLISHING: The
   source for this draft is maintained in GitHub at:
   https://github.com/shuque/id-dnssec-compact-lies

   One of the functions of the Domain Name System Security Extensions
   (DNSSEC) [RFC4033] [RFC4034] [RFC4035] [RFC5155] is "Authenticated
   Denial of Existence", i.e. proving that a DNS name or record type
   does not exist.  Normally, this is done by means of signed NSEC or
   NSEC3 records.  In the precomputed signature model, these records
   chain together existing names, or cryptographic hashes of them in the
   zone.  In the online signing model, described in NSEC and NSEC3
   "White Lies" [RFC4470] [RFC7129], they are used to dynamically
   compute an epsilon function around the queried name.  A 'type bitmap'
   in the data field of the NSEC or NSEC3 record asserts which resource
   record types are present at the name.







Huque & Elmerot         Expires 4 September 2023                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Compact Denial of Existence in DNSSEC       March 2023


   The response for a non-existent name requires up to 2 signed NSEC
   records or up to 3 signed NSEC3 records (and for online signers, the
   associated cryptographic computation), to prove that (1) the name did
   not explicitly exist in the zone, and (2) that it could not have been
   synthesized by a wildcard.

   This document describes an alternative technique, "Compact Denial of
   Existence" or "Compact Answers", to generate a signed DNS response on
   demand for a non-existent name by claiming that the name exists but
   has no resource records associated with the queried type, i.e. it
   returns a NODATA response rather than an NXDOMAIN response.  A NODATA
   response (which has a response code of NOERROR, and an empty ANSWER
   section) requires only one NSEC record matching the queried name.
   This has two advantages: the DNS response size is smaller, and it
   reduces the online cryptographic work involved in generating the
   response.

   The use of minimally covering NSEC records also prevents adversaries
   from enumerating the entire contents of DNS zones by walking NSEC
   chains.

2.  Distinguishing NXDOMAIN from Empty Non-Terminal Names

   Since NODATA responses are generated for non-existent names, and
   there are no defined record types for the name, the NSEC type bitmap
   in the response will only contain "NSEC" and "RRSIG".  Tools that
   need to accurately identify non-existent names in responses cannot
   rely on this specific type bitmap because Empty Non-Terminal (ENT)
   names (which positively exist) also have no record types at the name
   and will return exactly the same type bitmap.

   Today, some specific implementations of Compact Answers avoid the
   NXDOMAIN identification problem by synthesizing the NSEC type bitmap
   for ENTs to include all record types supported except for the queried
   type.  This has the undesirable effect of no longer being able to
   reliably determine the existence of ENTs, and of making the Type
   Bitmaps field potentially larger than it needs to be.  It also has
   the potential to confuse validators and others tools that infer type
   existence from the NSEC record.

   This document defines the use of a synthetic Resource Record type to
   signal the presence of a non-existent name.  The mnemonic for this RR
   type is "NXNAME" and its type code is [TBD].  This RR type is added
   to the NSEC type bitmap for responses to non-existent names (in
   addition to the required RRSIG and NSEC types).  The moniker NXNAME
   is chosen to clearly distinguish it from the response code NXDOMAIN.





Huque & Elmerot         Expires 4 September 2023                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Compact Denial of Existence in DNSSEC       March 2023


   No special handling of this RR type is required on the part of DNS
   resolvers.  However, a resolver could optionally use the presence of
   the RR type to modify the response code in the answer it relays back
   to downstream non-validating clients from NODATA to NXDOMAIN.

   An alternative way to distinguish NXDOMAIN from ENT is to define the
   synthetic Resource Record type for ENTs instead, as specified in
   [ENT-SENTINEL], and this has already been deployed in the field.
   This typically imposes less work on the server since NXDOMAIN
   responses are a lot more common than ENTs.  And at the time it was
   deployed it allowed a common bitmap pattern ("NSEC RRSIG") to
   identify NXDOMAIN across this and other implementations that returned
   a broad bitmap pattern for Empty Non-Terminals.  However, the
   advantage of the NXNAME RR type is that it explicitly identifies
   NXDOMAIN responses, and allows them to be distinguished conclusively
   from potential ENT responses in other online signing NSEC
   implementations.

3.  Generating Responses

   This section describes various types of answers generated by
   authoritative servers implementing Compact Denial of Existence.

3.1.  Responses for Non-Existent Names

   When the authoritative server receives a query for a non-existent
   name in a zone that it serves, a NODATA response (response code
   NOERROR, empty Answer section) is generated with a dynamically
   constructed NSEC record with the owner name matching the queried name
   (QNAME).

   The Next Domain Name field SHOULD be set to the immediate
   lexicographic successor of the QNAME.  The Type Bit Maps field MUST
   only have the bits set for the following RR Types: RRSIG, NSEC, and
   NXNAME.

   For example, a request for the non-existing name a.example.com would
   cause the following NSEC record to be generated (in DNS presentation
   format):

          a.example.com. 3600 IN NSEC \000.a.example.com. RRSIG NSEC NXNAME

   The NSEC record MUST have corresponding RRSIGs generated.








Huque & Elmerot         Expires 4 September 2023                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Compact Denial of Existence in DNSSEC       March 2023


3.2.  Responses for Non-Existent Types

   When the authoritative server receives a query for a name that
   exists, but has no resource record sets associated with the queried
   type, it generates a NODATA response, with a dynamically constructed
   signed NSEC record in the Additional Section.  The owner name of the
   NSEC record matches the queried name.  The Next Domain Name field is
   set to the immediate lexicographic successor of the QNAME.  The Type
   Bitmaps field lists the available Resource Record types at the name.

   An Empty Non-Terminal is a special subset of this category, where the
   name has no resource record sets of any type (but has descendant
   names that do).  For a query for an Empty Non-Terminal, the NSEC type
   bitmap will only contain RRSIG and NSEC.  (Note that this is
   substantially different than the ENT response in precomputed NSEC,
   where the NSEC record "covers" the ENT and has the Next Domain Name
   field set to the next lexicographic descendent of the ENT in the
   zone.)

3.3.  Responses for Wildcard Matches

   For wildcard matches, the authoritative server will provide a
   dynamically signed response that claims that the queried name exists
   explicitly.  Specifically, the answer RR set will have an RRSIG
   record demonstrating an exact match (i.e. the label count in the
   RRSIG RDATA will be equal to the number of labels in the query name
   minus the root label).  This obviates the need to include an NSEC
   record in the Additional section of the response that shows that no
   closer match than the wildcard was possible.

   For a Wildcard NODATA match (where the queried name matches a
   wildcard but no data for the queried type exists), a response akin to
   a non-wildcard NODATA is returned.  The Answer section is empty, and
   the Additional section contains a single NSEC record that matches the
   query name with a type bitmap representing the list of types
   available at the wildcard.

4.  Operational Implications

   A signed zone at an authoritative server implementing Compact Answers
   will never return a response with a response code of NXDOMAIN.  Tools
   that rely on accurately determining non-existent names will need to
   infer them from the presence of the NXNAME RR type in the type bitmap
   of the NSEC record in NODATA responses from these servers.  The
   response code in the DNS header cannot be authenticated, so inferring
   the status of a response from signed data in the body of the DNS
   message is more secure.




Huque & Elmerot         Expires 4 September 2023                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Compact Denial of Existence in DNSSEC       March 2023


   Address lookup functions typically invoked by applications will
   continue to work, although extra invocations of these functions (and
   corresponding extra DNS queries) may be caused.  For example, a
   NODATA response to the lookup of an AAAA record for a non-existent
   name, can cause an application to issue another query at the same
   name for an A record.  Whereas a NXDOMAIN response to the first query
   would correctly suppress additional queries for other types at that
   name.  Address lookup functions could be enhanced to examine the NSEC
   type bitmaps in responses to accurately determine non-existent names,
   however they would need to issue DNSSEC enabled queries and
   potentially deal with middleboxes interfering with the delivery of
   DNSSEC signed responses.

5.  Implementation Status

   Cloudflare, NS1, and Amazon Route53 currently implement the base
   Compact Answers scheme.  NS1 additionally implements the Empty Non-
   Terminal distinguisher in the NSEC type bitmap, using the private RR
   type code 65281.  There are no implementations yet that use the
   NXNAME distinguisher RR type.

6.  Security Considerations

   Online signing of DNS records requires authoritative servers for the
   DNS zone to have access to the private signing keys.  Exposing
   signing keys on Internet reachable servers makes them more vulnerable
   to attack.

   Additionally, generating signatures on-demand is more computationally
   intensive than returning pre-computed signatures.  Although the
   Compact Lies scheme reduces the number of online signing operations
   compared to previous techniques like White Lies, it still may make
   authoritative servers more vulnerable to computational denial of
   service attacks than pre-computed signatures.  The use of signature
   algorithms (like those based on Elliptic Curves) that have a
   comparatively low cost for signing is recommended.

7.  Acknowledgements

   The Compact Lies technique (then called "Black Lies") was originally
   proposed in [COMPACT-LIES] by F.  Valsorda and O.  Gudmundsson, and
   implemented by Cloudflare.  The Empty Non-Terminal distinguisher RR
   type was originally proposed in [ENT-SENTINEL] by S.  Huque.  The
   NXNAME type is based on the FDOM type proposed in [NXDOMAIN-TYPE] by
   O.  Gudmundsson and F.  Valsorda.






Huque & Elmerot         Expires 4 September 2023                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Compact Denial of Existence in DNSSEC       March 2023


8.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to allocate a new DNS Resource Record type code for
   NXNAME in the DNS parameters registry, from the meta type range.

         NXNAME  [TBD]  NXDOMAIN Distinguisher for Compact Denial of Existence

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, DOI 10.17487/RFC4033, March 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4033>.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, DOI 10.17487/RFC4034, March 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4034>.

   [RFC4035]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security
              Extensions", RFC 4035, DOI 10.17487/RFC4035, March 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4035>.

   [RFC4470]  Weiler, S. and J. Ihren, "Minimally Covering NSEC Records
              and DNSSEC On-line Signing", RFC 4470,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4470, April 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4470>.

   [RFC5155]  Laurie, B., Sisson, G., Arends, R., and D. Blacka, "DNS
              Security (DNSSEC) Hashed Authenticated Denial of
              Existence", RFC 5155, DOI 10.17487/RFC5155, March 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5155>.

   [RFC7129]  Gieben, R. and W. Mekking, "Authenticated Denial of
              Existence in the DNS", RFC 7129, DOI 10.17487/RFC7129,
              February 2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7129>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [COMPACT-LIES]
              Valsorda, F. and O. Gudmundsson, "Compact DNSSEC Denial of
              Existence or Black Lies", <https://tools.ietf.org/html/
              draft-valsorda-dnsop-black-lies>.





Huque & Elmerot         Expires 4 September 2023                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Compact Denial of Existence in DNSSEC       March 2023


   [ENT-SENTINEL]
              Huque, S., "Empty Non-Terminal Sentinel for Black Lies",
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-huque-dnsop-
              blacklies-ent-01.html>.

   [NXDOMAIN-TYPE]
              Gudmundsson, O. and F. Valsorda, "Signaling NSEC record
              owner name nonexistence", <https://tools.ietf.org/html/
              draft-ogud-fake-nxdomain-type/>.

Authors' Addresses

   Shumon Huque
   Salesforce
   415 Mission Street, 3rd Floor
   San Francisco, CA 94105
   United States of America

   Email: shuque@gmail.com


   Christian Elmerot
   Cloudflare
   101 Townsend St.
   San Francisco, CA 94107
   United States of America

   Email: elmerot@cloudflare.com























Huque & Elmerot         Expires 4 September 2023                [Page 8]
